A test at the National Leaders Center.
Here we are in our car.
We're going to go inside right now and start an interview.
It is February 20th, 1990, 9.30 a.m.
All right.
We're working, Jeremy?
We're working.
I'm on.
Okay.
Aaron, I'm interested in how you, it's very important to me, you're from New Dutchman.
You went to Hampshire College, which I guess is how you got here, right?
Came back.
But I'm wondering how you became, would you say you're obsessed, by the way?
Is there any obsession with what you're doing?
I've committed everything.
At what point did the realization come that you were going to become a Johnny Appleseed, shall we say, of literature?
I have to say, first of all, of course, I love books.
I'm not primarily a bibliophile.
My commitment is to Yiddish culture overall, to see a moment in history that is passing.
So it's not just an obsession with books.
with a literature and with a whole context.
So the question is, how did it all start out?
Well, but I want to know the motivation.
I kind of know how you started.
The story you know, right, okay.
Yeah, but I'm wondering what's going, you know, you're going to college, you were studying what?
Yeah, I mean, it goes all the way back to my first, when I first started out in college.
I grew up very typical for my own generation.
The story is very tied to the story of Yiddish and Yiddish culture.
Just the books, as I said.
Growing up, I heard Yiddish spoken as a language when I wasn't supposed to understand what the grandparents were talking about.
That was very typical for my generation in my house.
Yeah, right, right.
Yeah, same thing, I'm sure, right?
The same kind of dynamic.
Of course, the difference always has been between Yiddish and other languages, only that at least Greece has a country, whereas Yiddish never had that.
When Yiddish was lost among the immigrant population, it was lost, and there was no place where it was going.
Eventually, I went on to Hampshire College, where I ended up studying modern Jewish history, studying with an anthropologist.
Can I backtrack?
Yeah.
I did see one thing at one of the items that I read that your mother inculcated with.
Oh, no.
Yeah, you want to go back to that first?
Well, I think that's important.
There was a library being built, and she brought you to see it.
Oh, yes.
This is an important moment to me.
Go back to that.
No, no, no.
All my life, I... You're giving credit to your mother and your father.
Oh, yes.
No, no, no.
I grew up in a home of which books were valued.
I mean, my mother was just a great reader, as was my grandmother.
My grandmother, my mom's mother, was an immigrant from Galicia from New York.
Came to this country with... How do you spell Galicia?
G-A-L-I-C-I-A.
It was the southern part of the Austro-Lindary Empire.
It's now the Soviet Ukraine.
She came from near the city of Tarnapur.
It's T-E-R-N-O-T-L-L.
She came from a small village near there.
And she was just an inveterate reader.
She had eight kids.
They were very poor.
They had a really tough life.
So she came to this country all alone when she was 16 years old.
And yet she read all her life.
And my mom tells me how.
late at night up, she put all eight kids to bed and they were there in dirt poor, you know, with two rooms that were all crowded together, Providence and Fall River.
They would, at night she would always read.
She read in nature.
She read everything.
It didn't matter the language.
How did they get to Fall River?
She came into New York and I don't know, somebody knew something.
I don't know, she ended up there.
Yeah, she was married by the time she
Do you know if they brought books with them?
She probably did.
She was a young girl.
I mean, she came alone.
I just don't know.
The stories about books, as you're telling me about Jewish people.
Oh, no, no.
Books have always been so central to the culture.
Oh, yeah.
Well, just some of the things.
I mean, that sense that books were treasures, I mean, was inculcated.
I mean, nobody ever had to tell you this.
You knew this from the beginning.
No, but it was inherent in the culture in so many subtle ways.
For example, when Jews drop a book on the floor, you always kiss the book.
And that's just what you do.
Is that right?
Yeah, sure.
you drop a book, you pick it up, and you kiss it.
And that's just something that became so... Is there an expression for that?
No, it's just something that's done.
I mean, originally it's done because they're prayer books, right, or because they're religious books of one sort or another, but it's just something that applies to all books.
I mean, even during the 60s, you know, when I was growing up and the war in Vietnam was going on, and there was a huge generational conflict, and when my brother and I used to argue with my father all the time about the war and what was happening politically, even during that period,
We could have the most extreme anti-war literature in our room, and it was sitting on the floor, although my father might have hated the content of the books.
He'd always put that book on the table.
I mean, you would treat books with respect.
That was always there, regardless of content.
So where were you in terms of your family, or you said your brother, sisters?
I'm in the middle of three boys.
And your father and mother's names?
My father is Sidney Lansky.
S-I-D-N-E-Y.
He's a lawyer in New York.
And my mom is Edith.
Any problem at some point if I call them some folks?
No, no problem at all.
Yeah, my mother can talk to you at some length, because she's, to this day, is probably the biggest reader I know.
Could you give me your phone number?
Yeah, Edith Lansky, and her number's 508-758-6406.
I'm going to be doing, this is going to be pretty thorough.
Okay, that's great.
This is not a one-day interview by... I understand that it goes on the next day.
And it's long-term.
Okay.
The contract says, by the way, the book has to be done.
March of 91, talking to my editor last week.
She said she loves where I'm going.
She loves the way it's going.
She said, take all the time you need.
Oh, that's nice.
But I said, Becky, don't tell me this.
I'm a journalist.
I said, I need pressure.
I need discipline.
I intend to deliver the manuscript again here.
My point is, I'll be back, and we're beginning now.
So we begin.
Okay.
My mom can tell you some legs.
She's very funny because she loves to read these Jewish novels, and the novels of Jewish immigrants, of which there are thousands of
She lives in a small town.
I grew up in New Bedford, but 15 years ago, my parents moved to Matapoiset.
It's a small town close to Cape Cod.
Matapoiset is a very small public library that's open a few days a week.
And since my mom has to be one of the most avid readers in town,
She puts in a great many of the orders at the local library, and people can ask for books, and the library will order them.
So at this point, if you go into the Metapois public library, you'll see shelves and shelves of Jewish books there.
In the town, it has about three Jews living there.
I always say, you know, 300 years ago, someone's going to come into this library and wonder why they have the books that they have here.
Yeah, that's great.
Sorry, we have that, and so we have that.
Yeah, but growing up, certainly, that respect for books is always present.
I mean, my mom was the one who taught me how to read.
So, you had to be able to write your name, just write your first name in order to get on high and free card in New Mexico.
And so it was my mom who taught us how to do that, I'm sure, probably by the time I was four years older, so I was practicing and practicing.
Until that time, my mother would take out books from the library for us, and then we'd take out books ourselves.
We were quite young, still four or five.
They built a new library, a branch library, near our house.
We used to every day to see it being built and watch the books coming into it.
Really?
That sense of, every day.
I had never heard a story like that.
Oh, right.
Every single day.
Probably somebody would go to see a library going up.
Every single day my mother would take me by the hand and bring me there to see that.
So she really loved books, didn't she?
Yeah, and I think books, I mean, for her and for her mother, I mean,
not only was it something within Jewish tradition that books had great value, and we can talk about that later, but I mean, books had great intrinsic value altogether.
Books were knowledge, books were culture, books were a chance to rise above the mundane, above the quotidian, and just see what existed.
Do you know Saul Littleman and Tephs?
I've heard of him.
I've heard his name many times.
He used to review from me, years before he became former.
He used to say that these books are so precious.
He said, you opened what one?
He said, well, we can afford a book to get a book.
I just can't tell you what a blessing it is.
Oh, sure.
It's the world.
Everything there is.
But it just seems to be a cultural thing.
No question.
I can talk a little bit about why I think that is.
There are real roots in the culture.
But the reality of it, I mean, that you can read about, the reality of it in my own life was how it came out in such subtle ways.
I mean, even as a kid, I remember buying my first book.
the first books that I would buy, you know, go down to the little bookstore and, oh, whatever, I don't remember, a book on Abraham Lincoln, whatever the books were that, you know, a six-year-old buy.
I just wanted to make sure.
Some points or something like that.
Whatever it says you will buy.
I can remember as a kid, you know, putting these near my bed or putting them on a shelf and just, you know, watching them with great pride.
I mean, there was always a sense of, you know, books were knowledge, books were access to all there was in this program.
So let's jump ahead now to college.
Okay.
And when you went to college, it was with the idea of doing what, did you think?
Oh, I wasn't sure.
I was interested in law.
I was politically active.
I was going to CO during the end of the draft.
And when I went off to Hampshire, it wasn't clear what I was going to be studying, but my very first semester there, I ended up taking a course in the Nazi Holocaust.
It was the first college course in the country on the Holocaust, organized the year before by a group of Hampshire students.
And the people who were teaching the course, who were the greatest scholars from all over the world, who were inviting people like George Marcy, and Ralph Hilberg, and Eric Goldheim, they were the best people in the field who were coming to do the teaching.
This was at what point?
The University of Illinois?
Yes, this was probably 73.
So you were a freshman?
Yeah, they don't call it that at Hampshire, but that's what I was.
I had gotten out of high school a year, a quick high school hand in my junior year, and then spent a year cutting firewood and working as a gardener.
Really?
I had an old pickup truck and was just working for a year.
But eventually went on to college.
In the course of that, I realized that the Holocaust was fascinating, but it wasn't the Holocaust that was interesting to me per se so much as what was this culture that was destroyed.
The Holocaust was a question of German history.
How was it done?
What was the process that was less interesting to me?
But who were these Jews?
What was this people?
What was this world all about?
That was something that was of a very great interest to it.
As a matter of fact, the year before, in the course of working during the previous year, I had a chance to spend a fair amount of time with my grandfather.
My grandfather, Tom, was already in his 80s.
He was my mother's mother, also from Felicia.
An old Jewish guy who'd worked all his life as a junk man, picking up scraps and farms around the countryside of Rhode Island.
And so I had a chance to, I started doing a little junkies myself.
I would go around.
So he would go with me at work for 15 or 20 years since his first heart attack.
And sitting in the truck with him, I had a chance to imbibe some of his values in a way that I probably wouldn't have been exposed to otherwise.
And of course, I loved the books.
I loved the learning.
It was so central to everything that he was and everything he believed in.
And he was just, day after day in the truck, he was able to impart that to me.
And I guess even then I was able to understand that
But there was something in this culture, in Jewish culture, that came out of Eastern Europe that was very different from the mainstream culture that was being, you know, given to, you know, what the mainstream culture had to offer me.
You know, it was kind of just a visceral sense of something there that spoke to me.
When I got to college, started studying the Holocaust, suddenly I began, well, who was this people?
Who were these people?
Why was my grandfather the way he was?
Why was he so utterly different from most Americans that I knew?
What was this world all about?
So I went to the person who was the faculty advisor for the course, was the dean of social science at Hampshire, Leonard Glick.
Leonard was an anthropologist, he was also a physician by training.
Interesting.
What did you do about medicine?
Yeah, he was a physician by training, became an anthropologist, and then started, I can give you his number, he's a very instrumental.
Okay, yeah.
Why don't you do that right now?
Yeah, G-L-I-C-K.
Actually, yeah, I'm sure it's 549-4600.
549-4600.
Yeah, his home number is 508-544-544-7141.
Okay, so he was an anthropologist.
was also beginning to ask the same questions as I was.
Who were these people?
What was this world all about?
So I had what has to be the most fortunate of all learning experiences that I was able to learn alongside my teacher.
Here was a man who was a physician.
Is this recorded anywhere, by the way?
Yeah, I'm writing a book right now.
It was the most fortunate of all experiences.
A chance to learn a lot.
He might have been a physician.
He'd been a psychiatrist.
He gave Elvis Presley his induction physical when he was wrapped into the air force.
He was once in the front page of all the papers.
So he was not chronologically a contemporary of this.
He had been in his 40s or 50s.
Yeah, and then he just turned 60, so he had been in his 40s.
But the system in Hampshire, he had a Hampshire area that was a very new school then.
It was based upon the premise of Lynch.
non-traditional learning.
The idea that it once follows one interest is a free intellectual exploration.
Which works out here in Western Massachusetts.
I got a great education out of it.
Really, it was great for me.
At the time, we used to talk about modes of inquiry.
There wasn't a lot we should give the students.
It was to teach them how to go about exploring a subject, how to let the students learn on their own.
So I went to a lot less than the time interested in learning Jewish history.
And I said, he was also interested in the same subject at the same time.
So I was really able to learn alongside
which meant that my education wasn't something that someone taught me as a process of discovering.
As you know, when you discover things, you know them.
What kinds of things did you learn together?
Did you get me in a couple of years?
Yeah, first of all, the time, the first field of Jewish studies was very different, but Jewish studies wasn't even called, and the field was called Judaic studies.
Judaic means the study of Judaism.
Right, the study of religion, the study of ideas, theology.
But the study of Jewish studies, or the study
how they lived their lives.
This was more of a secular interest.
Well, I guess not exactly, only in the sense that, of course, culture is all embracing, all encompassing.
But it was more than just intellectual things.
It was a history of ideas.
Yeah, more than just theology.
It was a social history.
It was a history of how people actually live.
Well, at the time, I took a few courses, a so-called religious studies courses, mostly taught by non-Jewish professors.
mostly, you know, studies of Old Testament.
It had nothing to do with, oh God, you know, some Jew came in here, you know, eating an onion in the back of the room.
I can't imagine what these guys would think about it.
It's not what they would particularly, you know, there was something Jewish that they weren't very, they weren't teaching, obviously.
But when I was able to begin exploring more, let's look at how these people lived their lives.
So I used to go over to the UMass library and I'd go over there often and spend many, many hours there and just walk through the stacks and the areas
DS was the subject area, you know, the heading for social historical books and Jewish history.
And I would walk through and just pull books off the shelf at random and try to figure out who was who and what was what.
It was a whole universe.
And I knew very little.
I didn't know much more education than you read from, you know, exploring the whole world.
The reason I was taking course in history and other things to fill in the background for all this.
One day I came across a work.
published in 1916 in Philadelphia, the Jewish Publication Society, called The History of the Jews in Russia and Poland, by a historian named Simon Dubnow, B-U-B-N-O-W.
B-U-B-N-O-W.
Simon, S-M-O-W.
He was a Russian Jewish historian, probably the preeminent Jewish historian of the early 20th century.
and really the founder of modern Jewish historiography, the first to really, you know, what he called a sociological view of Jewish history, like the history of Jews.
Well, I didn't know this at the time how central books were.
I just found these old green books that were kind of dusty there.
I didn't know what it was checked out in many, many years.
And I brought them back and started reading, and I went to London.
I think these books were poor.
I said, well, take a look at them.
I said, yes, these are things that I think they are.
And of course, he knew how to
be critical about .
And I found reference works and began reading about this and realized I had stumbled across the central historian of the early 20th century.
And that was a profound intellectual .
And you found it in a library.
Yeah, just walking through the staff, just by accident.
That makes sense.
Yeah, of course.
The great things about books.
Yeah, education is ultimately a process of discovery.
Anyway, that was a big influence.
And the more I did that, the more I began looking at
but not Judaism or Jews, the more I began to try to understand who these people were.
I was already studying Hebrew and German at the time, which was a prescribed language for Jewish studies students.
And at the time, I said, you know, the more I studied, the more I realized that for the last thousand years, roughly, you know, between three, four, almost 80% of the world's Jews for the last thousand years had spoken Yiddish.
And although Yiddish wasn't part of a curriculum for any Jewish studies students at the time, I said, you know, this is really
If I'm going to understand who these people were and how they lived their lives, clearly I need to understand their experience in its own time.
Did you speak Yiddish in this time?
No.
No, I spoke to you.
In words.
No, but I wasn't supposed to know.
So I decided it was time to learn Yiddish in order to handle it.
Really, I was only interested in history.
You had a direction then.
You didn't stumble into this, is what I can see.
It's focused, but it's a great focus.
Well, I found the focus.
I mean, that wasn't the focus that was given to me.
The focus was given to me with Old Testament studies.
Well, you derived the focus, though.
Yeah, it was obvious to me.
I think it just split my own sensibilities.
So I decided to start studying eulich.
There was no course off of birth.
Eulich was taught almost nowhere.
Was it spoken at home?
Did your parents?
No, my grandparents don't get it.
And it stopped even to dissipate even with their parents.
My mother still could speak.
It was somewhat familiar.
Her oldest district was much more familiar.
So finally, if I'm a professor, I could ask me around here, who we study with.
And there was one other student at Hampshire that was interested in learning with me.
We finally found a professor at the University of Massachusetts .
He was himself a chapter for your book.
He was an extraordinary, he was one of the discoveries of Leonardo da Vinci manuscripts in the career that became the honor of Leonardo.
He's a real character.
He's retired now.
He's a great story in his own right, but he was in there with a great love of books and learning at all levels, and he spoke about 20 languages, all of which he had learned only to read literature.
He said, have you ever read Don Quixote?
He said, well, no, no, not exactly.
I didn't think so.
After all, you can't read it without medieval Spanish.
I said, well, I could have read a translation.
He says, translation?
What the hell is that?
You know, he had this idea that you could only read a word in its original language, and whenever he wanted to read a book.
When he wants to read a book, he goes, I mean, there's the language.
He taught himself Italian, so he could illustrate, you know, Dante.
Right.
I mean, he didn't want to read a translation.
Let's just repeat it.
Nerds languages to read books.
He just finished learning Turkish last year.
I think he's working on Japanese now.
That is a good story now.
Yeah, he's a man that's coming in his late 60s now.
He just continues to study.
It's what he does for the same place.
So you went to him.
Yeah, and by the time he decided, as a volunteer, he was going to teach a Yiddish class at the university, which he taught for one semester.
And the kids all came to the class.
a language requirement there, and I guess everyone thought somehow Yiddish would be easier.
And there must have been 25 students to start up.
Yeah, 25, isn't that spectacular?
Probably the only Yiddish course?
Well, now there are many.
Now there are over six of the universities.
But then it was one of a few.
I'm sure there were one or two in New York.
Yeah, there were a few.
Brandeis was teaching already.
Brandeis would have.
Yeah.
But it's limited.
It was limited to that.
And he taught us.
And I say the class, and I remember he'd come into classes
He was a very old-fashioned kind of teacher, very, you know, grammatical in his approach.
Suited me fine, but most of his students were a bit like that.
And one he bangs on the table and says, well, just because your grandmother spoke Yiddish, don't think you're going to learn the goddamn language by osmosis, you know?
You have to learn the language, the language like any other.
Well, the upshot of that was by the end of the first semester, out of 25 students, 23 had failed the course.
Yeah, because no one did anything.
You know, they didn't realize there really was a language.
Yeah, he was doing this on a volunteer basis.
He said, look, these kids don't want to learn the hell with you, and that was the end of the class.
I respect him for that.
Yeah, so he taught cancer the rest of the year.
And so a friend of mine from Hampshire and I, along with one student from UMass, went to him and said, look,
Well, we're enjoying it.
Yeah, well, you teach us, you know.
So he thought about it.
All right.
He says, I'll teach you.
He's kind of a rough guy.
I'll teach you.
He says, we're going to make a few things crazy.
I want you to work like hell.
You're always prepared before class.
You know, we're going to move very fast.
And the last part of the deal was that he would teach us after hours at five or six o'clock one day.
This is a dedicated teacher.
Oh, yeah.
He's one of the best teachers I ever had.
Only a teacher would do this.
I've learned so much with him.
I can't begin to tell you.
I mean, for two years,
We went to him one day a week for two years.
We sat with him for three or four hours each time.
We used to bring with us a bottle of wine and a loaf of homemade bread, one of the guys who was a good bread maker.
And as long as that lasted, we'd learn every week.
What did he look like?
It was quite a bit like Karl Marx, actually.
Big white beer, white hair.
Now, pick us.
What is that?
What was his first language?
He was born in New York.
I'm a Jewish guy.
Born in New York, in Brooklyn.
He spoke English as a kid.
He knew his English.
Bull knows football or whatever.
Of the 20 languages, this was his first language.
He spoke quite well.
Do you think he knew that he was performing a function?
the same kind of function you're performing with books on an individual basis?
Passing on something which is in danger of disappearing?
Jules has a genuine love of learning.
It has an absolute thing unto itself.
According to Jewish tradition, Jewish tradition talks about Torah Lishma, meaning learning for its own sake, the highest level of learning.
How would you spell that?
Torah, T-O-R-I-H, and then L-apostrophe S-H-M-A.
Okay.
Otherwise, I'll have to cry you at some point.
That's right.
Yeah.
The point of it is that the highest level of learning is not to learn to become a mechanic, or learn to become an engineer, or learn to become a lawyer, but you learn just for the sheer love of learning, for the sheer power of learning.
And that's what Jules had.
He taught us more than just Yiddish, and he gave me a whole education in those times.
Everything that would come up, and oftentimes we'd say, well, how the hell can I teach you kids Yiddish when you don't even speak English?
And he would teach us everything.
Growing up in America at the time, I think you just don't get a lot of education.
So you've had, from what I can see so far, three exceedingly influential people in your life.
Your mother, of course.
Yeah.
Well, yeah, I've been very blessed.
I've had three great teachers.
Lick, and now... Yeah, Leonard Lick, and Jules Peek, because they're my teacher in graduate school.
I have three great teachers in my life.
Which is probably the greatest blessing they've ever given to me.
If I was lucky with anything in my life, it was great.
And teachers.
Yeah, three great teachers.
It was just luck.
So go ahead.
Anyways, Jules started teaching us.
The grammar book was supposed to be a two-year course.
I think we did it in about a month.
Sorry, let's just get through the goddamn grammar.
We raced through the book.
We worked very hard on it.
Now, were you handling your other load of work?
Oh, yeah.
Well, Hampshire was an open curriculum.
You know, just what I was doing.
So I'm sure they liked this.
Of course.
I forget the whole idea.
Yeah, I was learning.
At the end, there were four of us in the class, myself,
The two other Hampshire students and one student from the University, where four of us used to get together with George each week.
And after we raced through the Grammar's Hour, I said, please, you want to spend your life studying grammar or you want to read literature?
You know, he wasn't always, he was the exact opposite of the way language is taught now.
There's no tapes, no language labs, no videos, there was no, no nonsense.
When I went to college, we had tapes, and that's in the early 60s.
He was strictly
You want to learn to learn it.
His idea of learning was you read.
You learn to read literature.
I remember he said, I'm going to find the hardest goddamn book I could find.
He found the book by Isaac Bersheva Singer called The Satan and Goray, G-O-R-A-Y, which was a novel set in the 17th century, a difficult novel written in a very difficult Yiddish.
He thought we should just start out with something tough and fight our way through it.
So we used to sit around.
We got copies of the book from Israel.
That was one of the few books that was available.
That's the first step ever once in the book we used.
And we'd start sitting down, and we'd go around in a circle.
There was one guy who always sat on his right, a guy named Jack, called Yanko, and he'd say, New Yanko, lay in a vessel, read a little.
And that's how we started every class.
And we'd go around.
Whatever it is before class, we would work at home together, preparing the test.
And when we first started, we had to look up every single word, of course.
We didn't know anything.
We got a little easier as time went on.
We'd underline the word in the dictionary.
But the second time you looked at the word, you usually knew it.
The very time you always knew it.
So you need to start to learn.
And the first few weeks, we were going for maybe a sentence or two sentences a week.
And towards the end, we were doing many pages a week.
Word by word.
But word by word, line by line.
We'd read a line out loud and translate.
Read a line out loud and translate.
My daughter's in Greek school.
Really?
Just three days a week.
Like an afternoon school.
Yeah, right after school.
And they're little.
I mean, you know, seven or eight.
That's a good time to do it.
They go and they love it.
I've got two daughters.
Do you speak?
You know, more than a lot of people realize.
No, I don't speak.
I kind of understand.
My wife speaks.
I happen to have a very Greek woman.
It's a coincidence.
And she speaks?
She speaks.
That's nice.
I'm very pleased.
It's a word.
My little wife reads Greek.
I've got a seven-year-old daughter who can do two things that I can't do.
Absolutely.
She can read Greek, and she can read music.
I can't read music, and I can't read Greek.
I'm almost 40 years old.
You can do two things that I can't do.
But anyway, go ahead.
Okay, so I'll continue.
We read.
In the course of all that, I was continuing my work at Hampshire, continuing to study Jewish history, and I was also teaching by them as well.
And I ended up using Yiddish sources to write my undergraduate thesis.
And by that point, I was beginning to understand more and more about Yiddish literature as well.
About, you know, the estimate is one half of 1% of all Yiddish books.
Just a check.
Yeah, one half of 1% of all Yiddish books have been translated into English.
One half of 1%.
Yeah, I think it's actually less than that.
I guess the estimate is usually given up.
The more I see, the more I think it is probably considerably less than that.
Most of them have been published
Yeah, it's a modern literature, Yiddish, you know, 125 life years.
That's right, exactly, exactly.
It doesn't begin until the 1860s, really.
It begins at a time when the old Jewish world breaks down.
As long as the old traditional Jewish world has remained intact, Jews spent their time learning Torah, Talmud, Ra within it, and not, they didn't write in Yiddish, which was the Vernashtava, you spent your time with scholarship.
When the old world began to break down, suddenly Jews had to figure out what it meant to live as a Jew in the modern world, and they drew upon this vernacular, which represented everyday Jewish experience, to create a whole new literature.
And it was from that that Jewish literature came first and forth.
I can give you a lot of information on the history of Jewish literature later.
In any event, it's a modern literature, an inherently sect of the literature, an inherently modern literature.
And really its primary issue is what does it mean?
What is Jewishness in the modern context?
So it's both ethnographic and reconstructing or documenting the world which had come before, and it's also laying the foundation for the world which will follow.
Well, that was that.
Finally finished with Jules, finally graduated from Hampshire.
And I decided I would go on to graduate school.
Graduated?
About when?
I finished him from December 76.
Okay.
Decided I would go on to graduate school in the fall.
I decided to go to McGill, and there was a great teacher, a woman.
I'd read a book by her, and I was very impressed with this book, and decided this was the person I wanted to study with.
What was the book?
What was his teacher?
The woman's name is Ruth Wisse, W-I-S-S-E, and she wrote a book called The Shlemiel is Modern Hero, a Keep of Yiddish Literature.
I'll look it up with Harvard.
Yeah, it's a small little book from the University of Chicago.
Anyway, the book made a big impression on that, so this is the person I wanted to study with.
Let me write it down, because it might be a laboratory transcript.
It says Ruth?
Ruth Wisse, W-I-S-S-E.
Uh-huh.
S-C-H-L-E-M-I-E-L.
Yeah, Schlemiel.
Right.
W-I-S-S-E.
She was a major influence.
I can give you her a number.
I do research quite thoroughly.
She's probably the best scholar of British literature around today.
It's 514-482-874-874.
That's in my field?
Yeah, that's in my field.
Okay.
Well, Ruth, is we still rowing it?
Yep.
Oh, yeah.
That's well.
It's just very slow.
Okay.
An hour on each side.
No, that's great.
So eventually I went on to graduate school.
Before I did that,
I headed off to, I had six months in jail, and I've been working, you know, all through college.
I figured I would take some time off and head out to California.
I had a deal at the time where you could go cross-country on the Greyhound for $49.
I took the Greyhound cross-country, ended up out in San Francisco, and lived in an apartment with a friend there.
And finally, after a number of different jobs, got myself a physician.
at a Jewish library in Berkeley.
My job was an unusual one.
The museum was operating on a really shoestring project.
It was called the Judah Magnes Museum.
It's called the Jewish Museum of the West.
Judah, J-U-D-A-H.
J-U-D-A-H, first name then, M-A-G-N-E-S.
Yeah.
Still there?
When I got there, they had a carriage house up behind the building.
There was a library in the basement of the museum.
A pretty large library, I'm guessing, maybe 15,000, 20,000 volumes.
And there was a librarian there who was from Kurdistan, you know, in the Ransom, I guess now.
And, you know, , his first language was Aramaic.
She had no Yiddish tradition.
It was a very ancient language.
I know.
I've got a man.
Yeah.
So Bacha was the librarian, and they had a carriage house out behind the building, behind the main building, an old carriage house, which was filled to the rafters with probably about 10,000 Yiddish books.
Now, that was the first time I'd ever seen large numbers of Yiddish books before.
Even in college, we needed Yiddish books for our studies.
We used to go down to New York, the old Lower East Side, which was still pretty Jewish then.
And I'd go around to old Jewish bookstores there and try to find books, but rarely could find what we needed.
I mean, most of the books were out, and almost all of them.
Well, this is interesting.
You see, again, this is part of what became your mission, I guess.
Of course.
Oh, yeah.
This knowledge.
Yeah, so almost all the Jewish literature was out at the time.
We'd go out to New York and, you know, look for books.
And it was very hard to find it, all kinds of adventures doing that.
Eventually, when I'm in Brooklyn, suddenly I come in there and I see 10,000 books passed in this carriage.
They had just gotten these books.
They had been donated to them.
There had been a commune of Jewish chicken farmers, Jewish socialist chicken farmers up at Aluma.
And the chicken farmers had a large library of books, of Jewish books.
And when they expanded the commune, the books were donated to this museum.
They didn't know what to do with them.
It's in Bacchus or Garamaic.
No one knew the language.
So they hired me to come in and try to sort these books out and make order of them.
Which your interns do now.
Yeah, exactly.
And they didn't have enough money even.
And the thing was operating in such a shoestring, so they got me, they used to pay me, I think it was $2 an hour, but only for 20 hours a week, although I worked for 40.
And then they arranged for me to get food stamps, and the consolation was that I could have any duplicate books I could have.
That's nice.
That's a nice quirk.
Believe me, at the time, I was really living in a smallman stamp in Fisco, and I was really on the quirk, I couldn't afford to borrow a train, I was taking the bus in, and it was really, really cheap, but
for the prize of these books.
Oh, yeah, and it was thrilling to me.
Suddenly, here I am with all these books I'd never seen before, of course.
And I spent almost five months sorting through them.
And a number of people came to visit me in the course of that.
There was a Yiddish writer who lived not far away, who used to come up, and she would tell me about the books, and she made things to me.
It was a very good professor.
So this was really adventurous.
Oh, yeah, it was an amazing thing.
And now I take it for granted that at the time I've never seen anything like this.
So it was a great experience.
I learned a great deal about Yiddish books in the course of all that and in the course of doing that work.
One day an old man came into the library, a really old guy, and he said, Jungerman, Jungerman, the young man, a generic name, no Yiddishist, and he said, Jungerman, do you know why all these books are in such good condition?
I said, no, I don't.
He says, I'll tell you why.
He says, it's because nobody ever read these books.
I said, no, why didn't they read them?
He says, I'll tell you why.
He says, because we were a communist commune, and the party made everyone buy these books for appearance sake, and no one ever read them, so.
But anyways, a lot of visitors learned a lot about the books, and we managed to get a good library for myself.
By the end of this, I got shipped that 95 box of books, and I went back to Massachusetts.
Then I studied Yiddish New York that summer, and then the following...
I was in Montreal studying.
Originally modern Jewish history, the East European Jewish history, then gradually switched over into Jewish literature.
The more I learned, the more I, you know, the literature itself gave me a focus on the culture that the history itself could have provided.
It's always this whole world opened up to me.
I was able to lead a screw-up man up by then.
You had it.
I mean, you had the language of this world.
Yeah, and the whole world, this whole literature was just opening up a formula.
It was reading everything else at 3 or 3 in the morning.
Yeah, it was a pretty intensive program.
Where did we make the leap that, all right, this world had opened up on the one hand, but where also it dawned on, you became quite aware that it was also in great danger of disappearing?
It came a little bit later on.
After we had our first year or so in grad school, we used to have a real problem.
We had a class, we never had more than six, seven, six years in the class.
But even so, each class could teach us, okay, next week we're going to read such a bit of writing.
And all these works were on prints.
There's no way to get copies of the books.
You couldn't buy it like you'd go get a Penguin edition on Dickens or something.
There's no such thing.
And we used to argue in class.
I got the copy of the Jewish public libraries, the Jewish communal library in Montreal.
And I got the copy of the McGill Library.
And I was in.
And the rest of us had a friend for ourselves with Veroxes and borrowing books.
We used to go to old Jews where we knew had good libraries and borrow books from them.
There were real problems getting through.
Somewhere along there, I got a letter from a friend of mine that I had known out in California who had written to me to tell me about a, she had gone to visit her hometown in Ohio.
I can't remember the city.
I don't remember the name.
And she went to visit this town city in Ohio.
She saw a rabbi there who told her that he'd been given 900 Yiddish books to the man God.
He gave 900 Yiddish books.
He didn't know what to do with them, but no one wanted them.
And he eventually sent them to the paper shredder.
Gee.
I read this letter, you know what I mean?
I couldn't believe this.
And I've heard stories like this before.
Well, they were gone.
They hadn't been shredded.
Yeah, that was too late.
So this was gone.
Yeah, this was the story.
Not long after that, I went down to New Bedford.
It was in their parents' one of these.
And I walked into the local synagogue there, and I just wanted to talk to the rabbi.
I walked into his office, and I see on the floor of his office a fruit glass filled up with a lot of old Yiddish books.
And among the books, the collected books were a writer named Mendelen and Moethesporam, one of the major Yiddish writers that I was writing my thesis on.
Mendel?
Yeah, M-E-N-D-E-L-E-N, and M-O-Y-K-H-E-R.
K-H-E-R.
That's S-F-O-R-I-N.
And that was a pseudonym, the first great Yiddish writer called himself Mandela's person.
So he used pseudonyms.
Shalom aleichem.
Yeah.
There was a lot of stigma attached to Yiddish literature in the early days.
Really?
Is that right?
These were all intellectuals who spoke many languages and writing Yiddish was going down.
I'd like to have a college professor have people know that they read mysteries.
Yes, exactly.
There's another function as well.
The other was that these were intellectuals who were speaking Russian, Hebrew in their own lives.
in order for them to be effective narrated in the literature.
They needed a persona.
They put on these folks' personas that gave them a voice to use in their own stories.
So that was kind of one of it.
So it was a device, a literary device also?
Yeah, exactly.
As well as?
Yeah, but the device was a telling one to call himself the book.
Indeed, as I jumped on it.
Yeah, it's because that was a very traditional role in traditional East European Jewish society.
There were some people who were called .
Which was when you were injured.
Exactly, exactly.
And that meant people who would travel from shtepel to shtepel from town to town, and they would carry with them either a little horse and wagon on their back a load of books.
They would have religious books and some modern literature.
They would have all kind of augmented religious life as well.
And they would spread out their wares and sell this.
But by doing that, they were one of the few Jews who had sanctioned travel on those.
They became much more worldly than the Jews among whom they were traveling.
So it was an interesting persona because it gave them away
being both worldly and traditional.
And it was a very traditional role.
So you knew of this writer?
Oh, sure, yes.
I was writing my thesis on him.
And you saw the book?
And I couldn't find these books.
And here I see the books in the basket.
So I said, excuse me, Rabbi, what is Mendel doing on the floor in a fruit basket?
And the rabbi said, oh, we're going to be throwing these books out.
They weren't going to throw them out.
They were going to bury these books, is what he said.
Bury them?
I said, what are you going to bury them?
As a scientist, Jews have enormous respect for books, as you know.
It's very central to the culture.
Religious books which become unusable, they're too worn out to use anymore, are given a funeral.
They're actually buried.
Jews don't throw out books.
They're buried.
They actually give them a... One or two things can happen.
You need to put them in what they call a genizah, which is a storehouse for old books.
How do they spell that?
G-E-N-I-Z-A-H, where they just sit forever.
But they're actually buried with a regular funeral ceremony.
attended by people?
Oh, sure.
Regular funeral.
I mean, they have the whole thing.
I've been to one such ceremony.
It's very moving.
Where was this?
Oh, right here in Northampton.
And this was done by you people?
By the local synagogue.
What did you think about it?
Farying books?
Well, these are books that were no longer usable.
I mean, they really couldn't have been used anymore.
These are old prayer books generally.
From a practical standpoint, we'd say, let's just incinerate them that we have to.
Yeah, well, this is a sign of respect.
I mean, it fits in with all of it.
Anyway, they're going to be burying the Yiddish books along with these Hebrew prayer books.
But the condition of them was not bad.
No, they were in fine shape.
I said, we're going to bury these books.
How can we bury these books?
And they said, well, they didn't know what else to do with them.
They'd been trying to give them to different libraries.
Nobody wanted them.
They just didn't know what else to do.
And this was about when?
This was in 70, probably 78.
I can assure you that I can put these books to use.
I even went through the basket.
In addition to Mendelen, there happened to be a volume of Das Kapital in Yiddish translation.
I said, listen, do you really want to be burying Das Kapital next to Talmud volumes?
He said, do you want the books?
You can have them.
I think they dropped a few baskets on my shoulder.
And I said, look, if you have more books, you know, I know millions of people who can read these books.
Can we date it as starting right about here?
Oh, yeah, this is getting there now.
This is definitely getting there.
Actually, the idea for the film came a little bit later.
Oh, I'm trying to see it.
I can feel it.
So I said, look, if you have any more books from my parents, they'd be happy to pick them up.
You know, I can definitely use them.
But sure, you'd be happy to do that.
Meantime, I headed back up to Montreal, and I thought, my God, if I could find this many books in a small town like New Bedford, imagine what I could find in a big city like Montreal.
So I started letting it be known.
This is, you know, no organization.
I'm just for myself, my own personal use, that I personally was interested in Yiddish books.
And before I knew it, I mean, boxes and bags and cartons of books began arriving.
Did you think of yourself as a collector at this point?
No, I was just getting my own research.
You were getting material to support your own research.
Yeah, exactly.
But books are arriving.
People would call me up when I had a bicycle and I'm racing around Montreal.
Later I bought a motet from one of my students and I used that with a book basket on the back of it.
The living room's filling up and the kitchen's filling up.
Before I know it, I'm really inundated with books there.
As a matter of fact, my girlfriend was complaining that the books were all over the bed when we finally had to buy one.
It was like Guatemalan hammocks and hanging over the phone.
It was completely out of hand.
There were thousands of books everywhere.
Somewhere along that time, my parents call up from New Bedford and say, Aaron, I think you better come down here pretty soon because the rabbi's given us so many books, we're afraid the second story of the house is about to collapse.
Remember the rabbi's name?
Yeah, Bernard Glassman.
Bernard, right?
Yeah.
He's a very good scholar in his own right, a very bookish guy in his own right.
What's the name of the temple?
Tifereth, T-I-F-E-R-E-T-H.
T-I-F-E-R.
He was a guy with a real respect for books, as I say, and therefore he was able to convey that.
He was very respectful.
He might remember this.
Maybe, yeah.
He will at least remember giving books to my parents.
He did that for quite a while afterwards.
Anyway, so the books started piling up, piling up.
Come to the house, the house.
Yeah, and somewhere along here was when I realized that, my God, this really, it was right along this point, and we were sitting in class, I remember the exact day of cold winter day, and I'm sitting in class, and we're arguing once again where we're going to find the books.
So there was an epiphanous moment.
Oh, yeah.
There was a light bulb that flies over your head.
Yeah, I can remember exactly the moment.
I was sitting in this classroom, and I'm thinking, this is ridiculous.
Here we are, but you can't find books throughout classes, and yet it's clear that as an older generation is passing on, books are regularly being destroyed.
Clearly, something needs to be done about it.
And so I went to Ruth Wisse.
She was the first one I spoke to.
I said, look, I think we ought to do something about this.
We ought to somehow collect these forms.
And she thought it was a great idea.
So I said, well, why don't you take a year or two off?
I mean, you could take a year or two.
I just finished a master's.
It was like a European program.
It was a three-year master's program.
And I was just finishing it out.
I said, why don't you take a few years off and then come back and get this job done.
She said, it's a national problem.
It's going to require a national solution.
I said, OK.
It's international if you're up in Canada.
Using her name, I wrote to a number of leading scholars, Irving Powell, Saul Bellow, and Alfred Kaysen, a bunch of people like this.
Alfred Kaysen's on our list.
All right.
Yeah.
I wrote to all these people.
Did they respond?
Everyone responded.
And I said, what do you think?
I had an old portable pipe writer, and I banged up these letters.
I said, what do you think of this idea?
I want to try to rescue Yiddish books before the rest of them are destroyed, and what do you think?
They all wrote back pretty much the same letter.
They all think it's a great idea.
It should be done immediately, but it might be too late.
Too many books might have been destroyed already.
At some point, not today, and you've got to make another trip to the Soviet Union, I understand, but at some point, do you think maybe I can get copies of some of these letters?
Yeah, of course I'm not sure I can have those letters.
This is a nationalist.
We've got to have your archival stuff.
I know, I know.
We have a pretty good archive of everything.
This is seminal stuff, you know.
I know.
This is before the Book Center started, so I'm not even sure where these are.
Okay, well, think about it.
You better find that stuff, because it's important.
We have plenty of other archives.
We have mountains and mountains of archival history.
Anyway, so they all wrote back pretty much the same letters.
I bet you they were thrilled.
What's that?
Oh, I think.
Yeah, I'd be interested to hear from him if he remembers this or he remembers what he thought.
I've got his phone number I'm supposed to call.
I'd like to hear what he, I've never met him, to see if he remembers what he thought.
I was at what amounted to a master's course.
It was just a seminar he gave to book friends in New York.
But I mean, it's like being with Socrates.
It's like being with Plato.
And he just spoke.
And then he did do a new book now on New York, which I reviewed.
And so they gave me this one.
So I think you can help me.
Oh, that's good, yeah.
I remember one of them certainly can help me, yeah.
A long time ago, it was 1979 that we did that.
Yeah, I think you're wonderful, man.
I love the way it was.
Anyway, so basically... Let me know.
I'd love to hear if you remember it.
We've got to be in touch.
Okay.
Go ahead.
So, we... I went down to New York.
I met with a lot of people who were experts in British books and British literature.
The best guess anybody had was there was 75,000 recoverable volumes still, actually, from the United States.
And that seemed like a reasonable guess.
That was what everyone could figure.
That was something else.
And I figured that would take about two years to round those things up.
And did you have any idea at that point where you were going to house them?
No.
I didn't know anything at the time, but my first instinct was to go to the major Jewish organizations to ask them to sponsor the project.
I have this idea.
It's not that expensive.
You just need a truck and get out.
75,000 books or titles?
Books.
So there was a lot of replication, obviously, of titles.
Yeah, but that was the guess.
There would be 75,000 volumes kicking around out there.
And as you know, we've gone on to collect almost a million books.
You're pushing the first minute.
Yes, everybody was wrong, obviously, but no one knew.
Well, I went around to the major Jewish organizations, and they all told me the same thing.
I said, look.
These are like bureaucrats in Europe.
Yiddish is dead.
Why are you wasting your time?
No one cares about these folks anymore.
Who would have said that, Yiddish is dead?
Everybody.
Every major national Jewish organization would have said that.
I mean, were they resigned to the fact that such a... Yeah, because they're not really involved in a cultural agenda, these people, dealing with Israel and with other issues.
There were more pressing concerns.
Yeah, I guess.
I can't believe they would basically say, who cares?
I'll read that.
It's too late.
No, they didn't say it was too late.
They said, who cares?
Who cares?
This is dead.
Why don't you go back to school?
Why don't you go to Israel?
What are you wasting your time for?
Oh, yeah.
That kind of stuff.
That was the general attitude.
This was not important.
Some Jewish people?
Oh, yeah.
I'm amazed.
The establishment is very non-focused on cultural work.
And there was no money for it coming, of course.
I figured this really wasn't the way to...
I was going to sit around and argue with these guys in the next 10 years, and I think my new books were being destroyed, and I figured I just had to go out and do something.
Destroyed in the manner that you have described already.
In the literal sense.
Most often, it never got that far.
What often happened, a grandparent would die.
They leave behind everything.
The kids come in to clean out the apartment.
They find a bunch of old books, and the books get thrown in the garbage cans.
And this has been happening for years.
Well, obviously, not just Yiddish books, but from your standpoint, obviously.
Because we're talking about a very fragile culture.
Sure.
There's no continuity beyond that.
And that's the whole thing to keep in mind with all of it.
These aren't just books we're talking about.
These books are the repository of the entire culture.
All that transpired in the last thousand years of Jewish history resides in these books, particularly after the Holocaust.
one out of every two Yiddish-speaking Jews is murdered in the Holocaust.
There's a culture that was literally ripped out of its roof.
And murdered.
Murdered.
So, half are murdered, writing summarily.
And then, of course, you've got the attrition process happening 40 years subsequent to that.
Of course, and a lot of the others were in the Soviet Union with terrible persecution.
On August 12, 1952, all the major Yiddish writers in the Soviet Union were shot on a single murder.
Is this kind of why writers like Samuel Francis who lived in New York forever?
Did he used to write in Yiddish?
Is he paying homage to his... I think it's the idea of...
You have to ask him that question.
I can't answer for him, but I think that's his idiom.
That's his language.
It's just like if you had to move to another country today, you'd still end up, I think your literary voice would still be English regardless of where you went.
Yeah, I think if you like Joseph Conrad, he could do it.
Conrad was Polish.
Yeah, that's pretty rare though.
I mean, any Jewish writers have done that too.
Many Jewish writers were written in indigenous languages, and the Coptic is only one of them, and there are thousands, right?
Yeah, so he wrote in English, right?
Yeah, so there are some who are able to... But it was symbolic, because he became... Some could do it, but I think in this case, most Yiddish writers... Most Yiddish writers are multilingual, and there are very few of them.
of Yiddish writers who were not fluent in several other languages.
Most Yiddish writers were intellectuals.
I mean, a guy like Shlomo Leif and spoke Russian, which is clearly not Yiddish, his personal correspondence with Hebrew and Russian.
Yiddish was a literary language, and he wrote... A beautiful writer, and his stuff does translate a lot.
Yeah, I mean, like our literature, it's... How do I know?
Because I can't read Yiddish.
But it's great literature.
I enjoy his stories a lot.
So I'll get a little bit of it.
Oh, really?
Oh, let's see.
Yeah, I have to speak with him Sunday after.
It's lovely.
Yeah.
Go ahead.
So.
We'll be switching in a minute.
Okay, where we know we're at.
We're talking about the books are more than books.
But books are being used to 75,000 recoverable.
Right.
So, anyways, I figured it out.
around for the next 10 years, but in the meantime, something that needs to be done about all this.
So I decided I would just start a new organization.
I came to Amherst at Ruth's advice.
It was difficult to do with the Montreal because of the border problem.
And we come from New York.
There were a lot of old Yiddish organizations in New York and a lot of politics there.
And we really wanted to make clear this was something brand new.
We weren't fighting old battles, but we were really trying to reach a new generation, save these books for the future, not for the past.
as a precondition for the study of Yiddish culture in future generations.
So there was real reason for coming here.
I had good contacts in the area.
Again, I moved down here, put together a board of directors of local faculty members, administrators, people I knew from the area.
This is, as you embark on what you perceive at that point to be at best a two-year admission?
That's right, that's right.
The summer of 79, I spent up in Maine, right after I spoke with the establishment, I was told what I was told.
I went up to Maine and we were picking blueberries, you know, in the blueberry harvest up there, a little bit of money, enough to print up letterhead and to get things off the ground.
During the fall of 79, spring of 1980, I started organizing it.
I was still finishing my thesis at the same time.
And then in April of 1980, we opened up and incorporated it.
It was called the National Yiddish Exchange, originally.
We changed the name shortly thereafter at the center.
And then in June of 1980, we'd done an old factory building over in Florence.
We didn't have any money at all.
We blocked our way into the lease.
We said we were getting the food around.
We made up some story.
We got this old loft and moved in there.
I don't have hoped at some point that the support would have been forthcoming.
To this day, we're still a grassroots organization.
It probably gives you your edge, too.
Oh, yeah, I think so.
But it's a huge struggle.
You cannot imagine the struggle as many times we've kind of left.
cluttering on the edge of bankruptcy.
It's so regular that we're kind of used to it by now.
The first five years, none of us were paid and we couldn't even afford heat.
We used to work with those gloves without the fingers on them and stuff.
I mean, it was really tough going for a long time.
But we moved in and then knew him in nothing because of old government surplus furniture and a government surplus IBM typewriter.
It didn't matter what the content was.
It's too early in the history of that literature to understand what's important and what's not.
So that's not your job then, to assess merit, shall we say?
Not right now.
We're collecting a lot of books.
Yeah, and to make the book accessible.
Anyway, the word went out, and the press releases got picked up, and some feature stories ran, and the Globe, and then the Times afterwards, and things started to spread.
But we knew we were getting values with letters.
I mean, you know, and first letters came in.
You know, see, no one knew how many books were out there.
The first were hundreds and hundreds of letters started coming in.
These are all in the files.
And then pretty soon, thousands of books began arriving.
Arriving?
Are you able to get them?
Arriving, by now.
It was so many that the post office started squawking.
They just couldn't handle this.
You know, we had a congressman intervene.
I mean, things really got out of hand.
Is that right?
Oh, yeah.
It went on for a year, I mean, to get the office.
Was he supportive?
Yeah, very good.
That was a pretty good deal.
Yeah.
I'm going to switch the tape.
Okay.
It's about to run out, but I don't want to talk.
.
Thank you.